     _____        _          _   _       _                    ____  _____
    |  __ \      | |        | \ | |     | |                  |___ \|  __ \
    | |  | |_   _| | _____  |  \| |_   _| | _____ _ __ ___     __) | |  | |
    | |  | | | | | |/ / _ \ | . ` | | | | |/ / _ \ '_ ` _ \   |__ <| |  | |
    | |__| | |_| |   <  __/ | |\  | |_| |   <  __/ | | | | |  ___) | |__| |
    |_____/ \__,_|_|\_\___| |_| \_|\__,_|_|\_\___|_| |_| |_| |____/|_____/

              Duke Nukem 3D v1.3D On-Disk Technical Support Manual
                   Copyright (c) 1996 3D Realms Entertainment

                    P.O. Box 496419 þ Garland, TX 75049-6389
                                 (214) 278-5655

                  ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                  ³TABLE OF CONTENTS AND HOW TO USE THIS FILE³
                  ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

    This document gives detailed instructions on how to play Duke Nukem 3D
                   and contains important troubleshooting information.

This document is set up with a quick search capability.  If you press F7 at
any time, you will get a listing of all the categories to look at in this
file.  Press F7 now to look at it.  In this menu, you can scroll up and down
the listing of items to read, and then select one by pressing ENTER.  You will
be taken directly to that item.  If you wish to search for a specific piece of
text, you can hit F3 to enter any text to search for.  If you just wish to
scroll up and down, you can use the arrow keys to move through the text.  You
can also use the Home and End keys to quickly get to the top or the bottom of
this file.  Press F7 now to see a listing of the categories in this document.


                             ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                             ³SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS³
                             ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

þ Duke Nukem 3D's minimum system requirements are:

  A 486DX2/66 with 8 megabytes of memory and VGA graphics.  The game will
  run on less than a 486DX2/66, but with reduced game performance.  VGA
  graphics and 8 Mb of memory are required, however.

  We recommend a Pentium with 16 megs of memory and PCI Local Bus Video.

  For the SVGA modes, a VESA compliant video card is required.  Please
  see your video card's manual for info on how to find out if your card is
  VESA compliant.  If yours is not VESA compliant, you will need to use a
  software driver to provide this compliance.  We suggest a driver such as
  UNIVBE.  If you have the registered CD-ROM, Univbe can be found on the CD-ROM
  in the \goodies\univbe directory.  If you have the shareware version of
  Duke3D, you must obtain Univbe on your own.  It can be obtained at any of 3D
  Realms' online support forums (See "3D Realms Online" at the bottom of this
  document for contact information).  To install Univbe, copy the files from
  the \goodies\univbe directory on the CD-ROM to a temporary directory on your
  hard drive, change to that directory, and type "INSTALL".

þ For game play, the following devices are optionally supported:
  Keyboard, Mouse, Joystick, Gravis GamePad.

þ The following sound cards/devices are also optionally supported:
  For Music: Gravis UltraSound, Sound Blaster (all of them), SoundMan16,
             Pro Audio Spectrum, SoundScape, WaveBlaster, Sound Canvas,
             Adlib, and General MIDI.

  For SFX: Sound Blaster (all of them), Gravis UltraSound, SoundMan16,
           Pro Audio Spectrum, SoundScape, Disney/Tandy Sound Sources.

  There is no support for the PC Speaker.

                           ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                           ³HOW TO PLAY DUKE NUKEM 3D³
                           ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

This section will give you general guidelines on how to play Duke Nukem 3D.
Due to limitations of this document, pictures of the various objects and
menus cannot be provided.  If you have the registered version of Duke Nukem
3D, please consult your manual for more detailed information, as well as for
some example pictures.

þ STARTING A NEW GAME

  To start a game of Duke Nukem 3D, you need to go to your Duke Nukem 3D game
  directory and type "DUKE3D" (without the quotation marks).  Once at the Main
  Menu, select "New Game" to start a game.  If you want to learn how to start
  a multi-player game, please see the section of this file titled, "How to Set
  Up & Play a Network (or Modem/Serial) Game".  Remember, you can press F7
  right now to bring up the table of contents, which will let you jump to any
  part of this file.

  Once you've selected "New Game", you will be prompted for the name of the
  episode you wish to play.  Once you make your selection, you will be
  prompted to choose a difficulty level.  You can choose from four different
  difficulty levels:

  1) Piece of Cake - The easiest mode.  Few enemies and lots of stuff.
  2) Let's Rock    - The Default Setting.  Normal difficulty.
  3) Come Get Some - For Experienced Players.
  4) Damn I'm Good - For Experts Only.  Lots of enemies, plus they respawn!

  Once you've made your selection, the game will load.

þ CONTROLLING DUKE NUKEM

  After you are in the game, you have many different keys that control Duke.
  You can get a complete listing of the default keys by pressing the F1 key
  during gameplay.  Some of the basic controls used to play Duke Nukem 3D are:

  Arrows -> Move Duke ³ Shift    -> Run      ³ 1 to 9 -> Weapons
  A      -> Jump      ³ CapsLock -> RunLock  ³ Tab    -> Map
  Z      -> Duck      ³ Ctrl     -> Fire     ³ [ or ] -> Inventory Select
  Alt    -> Strafe    ³ Spacebar -> Open/Use ³ Enter  -> Use Inventory Item

  You can also look up and down by pressing Page Up or Page Down.  Using the
  Home and End keys aims up or down.  The Insert and Delete keys will let you
  look left and right without turning that direction, and the 5 on your number
  keypad will return your view to center.  You can also use "U" to turn on a
  mouse aiming control system, and "I" to turn on crosshairs for aiming.

  There are more options than these:  press F1 during gameplay to see a
  complete listing of all default controls.  Any of these controls can be
  altered to whatever you want them to be by selecting the "Controller Setup"
  option in the setup program.  Please see the section on "Advanced Controller
  Setup for information regarding controlling your controller.

þ THE STATUS BAR

  During game play, the status bar at the bottom of the screen reveals plenty
  of info.  Here is a description of all the items in the status bar, from
  left to right:

  HEALTH  - Shows Duke's health level.  If this drops to zero, you're dead.
  ARMOR   - Shows the percentage of Duke's armor that is left.
  WEAPONS - Shows the status of Duke's weapons.  For each weapon, there is
            a two digit number.  The first number is the amount of ammo you
            have for that weapon, and the second is the max amount of ammo
            possible for that weapon.  If the numbers are brightly lit, this
            means it is the currently selected weapon.  If it is of medium
            brightness, it means you have the weapon, but it is not currently
            selected.  If it is dark, it means you have not found that weapon
            yet.
  AMMO    - Shows the amount of ammo left for the currently selected weapon.
  INV     - Shows the percentage and status (if applicable) of the currently
            selected inventory item.  To change the currently selected item,
            use either the [ or ] key.
  KEYS    - Shows the keys currently in your possession.  Keys are required to
            unlock certain doors in the game.  Once you have used a key to
            unlock a door, the key used no longer appears in this screen.

þ DUKE'S WEAPONS

  There are several weapons Duke Nukem can have in his arsenal.  All of them
  will be listed here.  Pressing the number of the weapon (using the top row
  of your keyboard) during game play will activate that weapon, unless you
  don't have it or have run out of ammo for it.  Weapons 7 through 9 are only
  available in the registered version of Duke Nukem 3D.  Each of these weapons
  can be recharged with ammo found scattered around the levels.  Each weapon
  has its own type of ammo.  For example, if you find a pistol ammo pack,
  you cannot use it with the Chaingun cannon.

  1) Duke's "Mighty Foot".  You can use this to kick your enemies.  You can
     never run out of ammo for this, but if you've only got your foot left,
     you are in big trouble.  This can also be used by pressing the tilde
     key (~) when another weapon is selected.

  2) Pistol.  This is a rapid fire pistol which does minimal damage.  Requires
     several shots to kill most enemies, and is not effective against boss
     creatures.  This weapon will need reloading after 12 shots.  The reload
     is automatic, but can take a couple of seconds during which you can't
     fire.  This weapon has an ammo limit of 200.  Ammo packs for this weapon
     found in the game have 12 rounds in them.  If you find a pistol in the
     game, it will already have 48 rounds in it.

  3) Shotgun.  This shotgun carries a far more powerful blast than the pistol,
     but has to reload (reloading is automatic) after every shot.  Reloading is
     done by pump action, which is quicker than the pistol's reload.  The
     shotgun can take down all of the lower enemies with a single blast.  This
     weapon has an ammo limit of 50.  Ammo packs for this weapon found in the
     game have 10 rounds in them.  If you find a shotgun in the game, it will
     already have 10 rounds in it.  If you get a shotgun from a Pig Cop, the
     ammo in it will depend on how many shots that Pig Cop has fired.

  4) Chaingun Cannon - This rapid fire weapon is a good weapon for dispersing
     several enemies at once, as it has a powerful blast.  Beware, though:
     this weapon fires very rapidly and uses lots of ammo!  This weapon has
     an ammo limit of 200.  Ammo packs for this weapon found in the game will
     have 50 rounds in them.  If you find a chaingun cannon in the game, it
     will have 50 rounds already in it.

  5) RPG (Rocket Propelled Grenade) - This rocket launched weapon is great for
     dealing with enemies from a distance.  When the grenade hits, it explodes
     with enough force to affect anything right around it.  This weapon can
     take out almost any enemy except a boss creature with a single, direct
     shot.  This weapon has an ammo limit of 50.  Ammo packs for this weapon
     found in the game will have 5 rounds in them.  If you find an RPG in the
     game, it will have 5 rounds already in it.

  6) Pipe Bombs - This weapon is great for setting traps.  When you use it,
     you will see Duke toss the bomb out in front of you.  You will then see
     your thumb-activated detonator.  To blow up the bomb, just press fire
     again.  There is no maximum range to the detonator:  you can be completely
     on the other side of the level and still explode your bomb with it.  You
     can use more than one pipe bomb at once.  After you throw the first one,
     press "6" on the top row of your keyboard.  You can now throw another
     bomb.  Holding down the fire button for a longer period of time will cause
     the pipe bomb to travel further.  If you are kneeling when you release
     the pipebomb, it will just go out in front of you and hardly travel
     anywhere at all.  You can carry a maximum of 50 pipe bombs.  Ammo packs
     for this weapon found in the game will have 5 pipebombs.

     THE FOLLOWING WEAPONS APPEAR ONLY IN THE REGISTERED VERSION OF DUKE3D.

  7) Shrinker - This slick weapon captured from the aliens will shrink your
     enemies to pint-sized for several seconds.  During that time, Duke can
     stomp and squish the shrunken foes by walking on top of them.  Be careful
     when around mirrors!  This weapon has an ammo limit of 50.  Ammo packs
     for this weapon have 5 shots in them, and a found shrinker comes loaded
     with 10 shots.

  8) Devastator - Straight out of the Pentagon's top secret labs comes this
     double barreled brute of a weapon which lets loose swarms of miniature
     stinger missiles in the direction of your enemies.  All out mayhem, or
     shot controlled bursts - it's all up to you!  This weapon has an ammo
     limit of 99.  Ammo packs for this weapon have 15 shots in them, and a
     found devastator will have 15 shots in it.

  9) Laser Tripbomb - Another strategic device which you place on flat-
     walled surfaces.  After a 2 second delay, a bright red laser beam is
     emitted across to the opposite wall.  Anyone or anything crossing the
     beam sets off a powerful directional blast.  You had better get out of
     the way when you set them!  Perfect for setting devious traps and
     barriers.  This weapon comes in single units only, and you can carry a
     maximum of ten of them at any one time.

  0) Freezer - Streams of powerful molecular discharges ricochet through the
     environment as this weapon chills its victim down to the point of death
     and ultimate crystallization.  Once an enemy is frozen, you'll have only
     a few seconds to shatter him beyond the point of recovery, else thawing
     will ensue.  This weapon has an ammo limit of 99.  Ammo packs will have
     25 shots in them, and a found freezer comes loaded with 25 shots.
     NOTE: During a Multi-Player game, if you or your friends die, the dead
           player will sometimes drop their currently selected weapon.  If
           this weapon is picked up, all the ammo that was in that weapon will
           transferred to whomever picked it up.  The amount of ammo obtained
           from such a weapon pickup depends on how much ammo the player had
           when they were killed.


þ INVENTORY ITEMS

  There are several items that Duke can find and use to help him during the
  game.  Unlike normal items, these are kept until you select and use them.
  Here is a list of the items, along with a brief description of each:

  1) Medkit - A large white health pack.  This carries a maximum of 100% of
     additional health.  When you are low on health, you can select this to
     bring your health back up to 100%.  The amount used to do this will be
     subtracted from the amount stored in the Medkit.  A shortcut to selecting
     and activating the Medkit is avaliable by pressing the letter "M" during
     gameplay.

  2) Steroids - A small item that looks like a pill bottle.  This item, when
     used, will make Duke run extremely fast.  He will also have a very strong
     kick.  However, the time of this item is limited, and once activated, it
     cannot be turned off.  When it runs out, you will have to find another
     bottle of steroids in order to use it again.

  3) Holoduke - This looks like a small translucent image of Duke.  Holoduke
     is an item meant to fool your opponents (game enemies, or your friends)
     during game play.  When activated, a duplicate of yourself pops up
     wherever it is activated.  This Holoduke does not fire or move:  it just
     stands there.  This is a very good decoy during DukeMatch.  Game enemies
     will go after Holoduke instead of you if it is closer to them than you
     are.  Holoduke has a limited lifespan, but can be turned on and off during
     this time.  Once Holoduke is used up, you have to find another one to use
     it again.  A shortcut to activating Holoduke is available by pressing "H"
     during gameplay.

  4) Jetpack - This item is silver, and looks like a backpack.  The jetpack
     will allow Duke to fly pretty much anywhere.  It has a limited lifespan,
     but can be turned on and off during use.  Be warned:  if you run out of
     jetpack fuel when you are very high up in the air, Duke will fall to his
     death.  A shortcut to activating this is to press "J" during gameplay.
     Once activated, you control the jetpack by either pressing the Jump key
     to go up, the Duck key to go down, or "J" again to turn it off.  To use
     the jetpack, you need to use whatever keys are defined for duck and jump
     to go up and down.  By default, these keys are "A" and "Z".

  5) Night Vision Goggles - These are dark brown, and look like glasses.
     The Night Vision Goggles will let you see in very dark areas by making the
     area you are in look brighter.  They have a limited lifespan, but can be
     turned on and off during this time.  A shortcut to activating these is
     available by pressing "N" during gameplay.

  6) Scuba Gear - Looks like a backpack with two airtanks on it, and is an
     orange-yellow color.  It has a limited lifespan, and is automatically
     activated whenever you go underwater.  This protects Duke when he is
     submerged.  If it runs out, or if you go underwater without this, Duke
     starts taking damage.  When you are swimming, you use the duck and
     jump keys to move up and down underwater.  By default, these are "A" and
     "Z".

  7) Protective Boots - These look like a small pair of boots.  These will
     protect you from the greenish radioactive slime that runs in the sewers
     on many levels.  They are automatically activated whenever you walk on
     the slime.  They have a limited lifespan.  When they run out, or if you
     don't have them, walking in the slime will hurt you!

  There are more inventory items in the registered version.  Please see your
  registered game manual for information on the items listed here, as well as
  the extra registered-only items.

þ REGULAR GAME ITEMS

  There are some other items that are not inventory items that Duke will
  encounter during game play.  These items are used immediately when hit, and
  cannot be stored for later use like inventory items can.  They are:

  1) Small Medkit - This item gives an instant boost of 10 percent health, but
                    will not raise your health past 100%.
  2) Large Medkit - This item gives an instant boost of 30 percent health, but
                    will not raise your health past 100%.
  3) Healing Atom - This item looks like a blue atom.  It will give you an
                    instant boost of 50% health.  This item will allow your
                    health to go over 100%, but not past 200%.
  4) Armor        - This item will give you extra protection against attacks.
                    It will cause you to take damage at a slower rate.
  5) Keycards     - There are three types of keycards you can find in the
                    game.  These are red, yellow, and blue.  Each one opens
                    a locked door with a lock of the same colour.


þ GAME ENEMIES

  Here are the enemies that Duke Nukem will encounter during the game:

  1) Assault Trooper
     The Assault Trooper is the basic alien ground assult trooper sent by the
     ruthless alien leaders to serve as the first offensive wave against Earth's
     defenses.  These guards are generally brownish in colour and wear green
     jackets.  They attack using a laser pistol, and they can attack from the
     air by using jetpacks.  Though moderately armored, some Troopers have
     exhibited high resistance to injury.  Take precautions that a fallen
     Trooper stays that way - fallen.  When these characters are killed, they
     will sometimes drop pistol ammunition that you can take and use.

  2) Assault Captain
     These enemies are the same as the basic Trooper in all aspects, except
     that they wear red jackets instead of green ones.  In addition to this,
     Assualt Captains have a wrist-mounted Phase Induced Teleporter Device
     (PITD) capable of physically translocating its user to any destination
     within the device's range.  Used as a tactical assult instrument, the
     PITD enables the Assault Captain to launch surprise attacks against his
     intended human targets at will.  When these characters are killed, they
     will sometimes drop pistol ammunition that you can take and use.

  3) Pig Cop
     The Pig Cops are mutated alien operatives positioned to supress residual
     human opposition and to police the new centres of alien power on Earth.
     Their distinct warthog-like appearance and aggressiveness make them easy
     to spot, but difficult to overcome.   They brandish a 10 guage shotgun
     and have a special surprise ground level attack.  These characters have
     extremely high intolerance to the presence of humans, and exhibit blind
     rage when they detect human scent.  Also, protective body armour worn
     beneath their uniforms give them added endurance. When killed, this
     character may drop either their shotgun or body armour.

  4) Recon Patrol Vehicle (RPV)
     This sleek and deadly anti-gravity powered reconnaissance vehicle is
     operated by specially trained Pig Cops for the purpose of maintaining
     alien control in areas of human resistance.  The attack mode of this craft
     is aerial strafing by side mounted laser cannons.  The pilots of these
     craft are protected by an automatic pilot ejection mechanism that
     activates milliseconds before impact during a crash.

  5) Octabrain
     This character's abundant brain mass and specialized trifocal vision
     combine to make the Octabrain a formidable alien weapon against all
     sentient life on Earth.   Their method of attack is a powerful blast of
     mental energy released against its prey, thus weakening and confusing
     its intended victim.  If the victim doesn't die from the mind blast, the
     Octabrain's powerful razor sharp teeth are ready to finish the job.  The
     Octabrain prefers dark and secluded habitats from which to wage its attack.
     Their immense mental power is offset by a generally unprotected, though
     tough and leathery, body.

     The following characters appear only in the registered version:

  6) Enforcer
     With chaingun blazing, the armored Enforcer can make fast business of
     dispatching any remaining human opposition.  Powerful hind legs enable
     the Enforcer to leap to many places where an unsuspecting Duke may be
     caught of guard... so beware.   The Enforcer may drop either chaingun
     ammo or his ripper when he dies.

  7) Sentry Drone
     Mechanized death -- there's no better way to describe these airborne
     alien watchdogs.  By the time you hear their high pitched whine as they
     engage their anti-grav propulsion units, it's probably too late.   The
     drone will swiftly collide with its target and explode with great force.
     Latest intel suggests that the drones have been refitted with defensive
     evasion microchips.

  8) Assault Commander
     The free-floating Assault Commander knows how to throw his weight around
     as he engages his anti-grav spin-deck in your face.   When at greater
     distances, he fires deadly rockets from his rear port which dangles below
     his anti-grav spin-deck.   Worse case of hemmorhoids ever seen this side
     of Delta Quadrant.  The Assault Commander may drop a supply of rockets
     when killed.

  9) Protozoid Slimer
     It emerges from its egg case with a simple nervous system and only one
     mission in life -- to suck your brains out through your nose and leave
     you a lifeless heap on the floor.  The Protozoid Slimer is evasive as it
     stretches its elastic body from ceiling to floor, and then creeps up your
     pant leg for the coup de gras.   Get them before they get you.

     These characters only appear once in each episode.  They're very powerful,
     and very rare, so when you see them, LOOK OUT!

  A) Battlelord
     The hulking Overlord commands the alien attack forces on Earth and makes
     the very ground he strides upon tremble.   His deafening roar splits the
     air as his rapid fire artillery and mortar rounds tear your body asunder.
     He has no known weaknesses... only relentless attacking will make Duke
     prevail.  The Battlelord does appear in Episode 1 once, and sometimes
     appears in Episodes 2 and 3 scattered throught the levels.

  B) Overlord
     Little is known about this alien biological weapon except that it is
     capable of unleashing powerful rocket attacks from it's surgically
     implanted dual launching system on its massive back.  It's behavior and
     weaknesses are completely unknown at this time.  The Overlord appears
     only in Episode 2.

  C) The Cycloid Emperor
     The ultimate leader of the alien attack force.   No human has managed to
     get close enough to report on it and live.   Extreme caution is urged.
     The Cycloid Emperor appears only in Episode 3.


                          ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                          ³HOW TO USE THE SETUP PROGRAM³
                          ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

If you want to play a network, modem, or serial game, you must use the
SETUP.EXE program found in your game's directory.  You also need to run the
setup program to configure your sound card, controller, and video mode.
Here is a brief summary of the options available in the Duke Nukem 3D setup
program:

þ SOUND SETUP

  This option will let you configure your sound and music options.  Use this
  to tell the game which sound card and music card your computer has.

þ SCREEN SETUP

  This option will let you pick which video mode you wish to play in.  The
  SVGA options require the use of a VESA compliant video card.  Check your
  video card's manual for info on whether your card is VESA compliant.

þ CONTROLLER SETUP

  This option will let you choose what controller(s) you wish to play with,
  and will allow you to customize the controls for them.  If you wish to alter
  the controller layout, this is the place to do it.  Please see the next
  section, "Advanced Controller Setup" for information on some of the more
  advanced uses of this section.

þ NETWORK GAME

  This option will let you configure and play a network game of Duke Nukem 3D.
  Please see the section on "How to Set Up & Play a Network Game" for detailed
  information on this.  Press F7 now to see an index of sections.

þ MODEM GAME

  This option will let you configure and play a modem game of Duke Nukem 3D.
  Please see the section on "How to Set Up & Play a Modem Game" for detailed
  information on this.  Press F7 now to see an index of sections.

þ SERIAL GAME

  This option will let you configure and play a serial game of Duke Nukem 3D.
  Please see the section on "How to Set Up & Play a Serial Game" for detailed
  information on this.  Press F7 now to see an index of sections.

þ SEE THE DUKE NUKEM 3D HELP FILE

  This option will let you see the file you are currently viewing.

þ CHANGE SETUP FILENAME

  This option will let you alter the name of the configuration file you are
  working on.  With this option, you can have multiple configurations per game.
  This way, if a friend comes and plays on your machine, he can have his own
  keyboard (or anything else) layout, and it won't upset your configuration.

  NOTE: Version 1.2 of Duke Nukem3D uses a different setup configuration file
  than version 1.0 or v1.1 did.  If you run v1.2 on your old config file, it
  will be automatically updated to the new format.  The old file will be
  renamed for backup purposes.

þ SAVE AND LAUNCH DUKE NUKEM 3D

  This will save your configuration file and launch Duke Nukem 3D in single
  player mode. Do not use this option if you wish to play a multi-player game.


                           ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                           ³ADVANCED CONTROLLER SETUP³
                           ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

There are three major enhancements to the control system in this version of
Duke Nukem 3D.  The first is expanded joystick support,  the second is advanced
control setup, and the third is mouse aiming.  Duke3D now supports a lot more
joysticks than previous versions.  The newly added joysticks are as follows:

  Keyboard and FlightStick: (compatible with Microsoft SideWinder)
  Keyboard and ThrustMaster: (compatible with Logitech Wingman)
  Keyboard and GamePad: native support for the Gravis GamePad

The support of these new joysticks means that the hat switch is supported on
those joysticks possessing one, and that rudder support has been added for
people owning an external rudder.  The GamePad no longer functions as an analog
joystick but rather as a digital one.  A special setup menu has been created
just for the purpose of setting up the GamePad.  For all other joysticks, the
"Setup Joystick" menu should still be consulted for changing joystick options.
Enabling the rudder can be done under the Setup Joystick menu as well.

The second major improvement involves the menu known as advanced control
options.  Advanced control options allows you to redefine a controller
completely.  This is accomplished through redefinable analog axes and being
able to assign buttons to digitized axes as well. An analog device is one which
returns proportional values based on the speed or extent to which the device
is manipulated.  Examples of analog devices are mice and most joysticks.  A
digital device is one which returns on or off values when it is manipulated.
Examples of digital devices are the keyboard and the gamepad.  The new control
system takes an analog input (such as the mouse or joystick) and digitizes it
into an on or off.  Once this is done, it is possible to assign a button to the
newly digitized input.  For example, suppose the mouse was setup in such a way
that when it was moved up it translated into pressing the fire button and when
it was moved down it translated into pressing the open button.  This would
probably not be an advantageous setup, but it demonstrates how an axis can have
buttons assigned to it. At the same time, however it would be possible to still
use the analog component of that axis to move the player forward and backward.
In essence the player would always fire when moving forward and try to open
things when moving backward.  The advanced control options menu is broken up
into advanced mouse setup, advanced joystick setup, and advanced throttle /
rudder setup. Each these sub-menus allow you to define the control parameters
for two axes.  The mouse and joystick each have two axes, X and Y, and the
throttle/rudder compromise a third set of X and Y axes.  For each of these axes
one can assign an analog function (either turning, strafing or moving) and
optional digital ones.

One should keep in mind that both analog and digital control options are active
at the same time, so in most situations if you want to use an axes as an analog
one, it should not be used a digital one as well.  When you first enter this
menu, you will see how the axes are defined by default.  If you change any of
the axes definitions, the only way to restore the default definitions is by
deleting your setup file and starting over.

Therefore, it is recommended that you understand how the system works before
changing these advanced options.

There is a new option located in the Setup Mouse menu, called "Mouse Aiming".
When Mouse aiming is on, moving the mouse forward and backward pitches the
player's head up and down.  Setup allows one to change the way in which the
mode is activated.  The Mouse Aiming buttons is defaulted to be a toggle button
meaning, that it must be pressed once to enter the "Mouse Aiming," and then
pressed again to leave the mode.  If mouse aiming mode is set to momentary
instead of togglable, "Mouse Aiming" is only active as long as the Mouse Aiming
button is depressed.


                          ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                          ³DUKE 3D HELP & TROUBLESHOOTING³
                          ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

  Before contacting 3D Realms Technical Support, please try all of the things
  listed in this file first!  If you do contact us, please do not do so unless
   you provide the information requested at the bottom of this document.  We
      cannot help if you do not provide us with the information requested.

  3D REALMS CANNOT HELP YOU IF YOU HAVE ALTERED OR DAMAGED .CON FILES.  Do not
              contact us for help if you have altered your files.

þ 3D Realms strongly recommends that you consult your hardware and software
  manuals for your system before you make any suggested changes to your
  current system setup.  Your manuals will tell you if you are about to make
  changes that may irreparably alter your computer or its configuration.
  Modifying your system or software can be dangerous if not done properly.
  3D Realms will not be able to assist you with any problems resulting from
  such modifications.

þ If you get an error that has the words "Granular Limit Error" in it, it
  means your DRAM speed is too fast.  You'll need to go into your CMOS and
  slow it down.  Info on how to do this will be in your computer or your
  motherboard's manual.

þ If you get the error "Exec Error: No such file or directory", it's likely you
  have selected the controller configuration "Keyboard and External".  Go back
  and reconfigure your controller.  Do not select the "External" controller
  unless you have a controller or a device that specifically tells you that you
  need to select this.

þ If you have an ATI Mach64 video card and cannot access the higher SVGA
  modes, check your C:\MACH64 directory for the file m64vbe.com.  Run it
  before you play Duke, and you should be OK.  If you do not have this file,
  contact ATI for an update.

þ If you have a Matrox Millenium video card and cannot get your video working
  properly, please make sure the BIOS on your video card is at least v1.9.  If
  it is not, contact Matrox for a BIOS upgrade.

þ If you have a Diamond SpeedStar video card, disable Zero Wait State.

þ If you are running a Compaq computer with a VGA card and the game tells
  you that you do not have a VGA card, or if you experience lockups on a
  Compaq computer with a VGA card, you will need to contact Compaq for a
  special video driver.  The reason for this is that Compaq has some video
  cards that do not conform to all proper detection methods.  There is a
  device driver available from Compaq that will fix this problem.  The
  driver's name is FINDVGA.SYS.  This file used to be available on their BBS
  with the filename of SP0117.ZIP, but as of the writing of this document,
  it is not available.  Please contact Compaq if you cannot locate the file.

þ This game supports the VESA VBE standard for SuperVGA graphics.  Many Super
  VGA graphics cards are VESA VBE comaptbile atthe hardware level, requiring no
  special action on your par to get the game running correctly.   If you are
  having problems running this game with the graphics card in your computer,
  try the following steps:

  1) If you have the VESA VBE driver that came with your graphics card, then
     install the driver and try to run the game.  Most VESA VBE drivers can be
     installed from a program that you run at the DOS command line.  Consult
     the documentation that came with your graphics card or computer system for
     installation instructions and VESA VBE compatibility.

  2) If you cannot find a VESA VBE driver for your graphics card, call your
     graphics card or system manufacturer or dial up their BBS, CompuServe
     forum, or Internet site.  You will most likely be able to download a
     driver or have them send you one by mail.

  3) If you do not have a VESA VBE driver for your graphics card or your VESA
     VBE driver does not work with the game, then try the Universal VBE driver,
     UniVBE.  UniVBE is included with the registered CD-ROM of Duke Nukem 3D,
     and can be found in the directory \goodies\univbe on the CD.  Please note
     that while we have included UniVBE for your convience on the CD, it is a
     shareware product produced by a different company.  If it works for this
     game and solves compatibility probelsm for you, then you may want to
     continue using it for this and other games.  If you continue to use it,
     you should register the program.  To register UniVBE, follow the
     instructions onscreen during the UniVBE installation procedure.

  To install Univbe, go to the \goodies\univbe directory on the Duke Nukem 3D
  CD-ROM, and type install.  Installation instructions are on screen.  If you
  are having problems installing UniVBE, please contact Scitech.  UniVBE is
  not a 3D Realms or Apogee program, we cannot help with it.

þ If you run the game and get an error during loading that says something like
  "* ERROR!(L63) Parameter 'BURNING_FLAME' is undefined", or some other error
  relating to the CON files, and then some sort of comment like "Errors found
  in game.con file, Use defaults (Y/N)?" it means that your game configuration
  (con) files have been altered to the point where the game will not run
  properly.  We strongly urge you to reinstall at this point.  The .CON files
  are ASCII text files which can be edited and usedd to radically alter the
  game parameters.  We strongly urge you to not change these unless you know
  what you are doing.  If you corrupt these and run the game anyway, the game
  will likely crash.  To correct the problem, reinstall.

  3D REALMS CANNOT HELP YOU IF YOU HAVE ALTERED OR DAMAGED .CON FILES.  Do not
  contact us for help if you have altered your files.

þ If you have a NexGen/586 CPU/Motherboard, you most likely can't get the game
  running.  Try going into your CMOS and look for a setting called "Alternate
  Instructions".  If it is set to OFF, set it to ON. If this doesn't work,
  NexGen has a fix on their World Wide Web site called the Q87 floating point
  emulator.  Their Web site can be reached at http://www.nexgen.com.

þ If you have a Creative Labs Sound Blaster 16 and some sort of daughterboard
  add-on card like the WaveBlaster or Roland Sound Canvas daughterboard, you
  may have trouble getting the MIDI music and SFX working properly.  To fix
  this, first try selecting WaveBlaster as your music device, even if you don't
  actually have a true WaveBlaster.  If this doesn't work, there is a fix for
  this type of problem available from Creative Labs.  This fix is called the
  "Sound Blaster MPU401 Patch".  It is can be found on any of the Apogee / 3D
  Realms official file areas listed at the bottom of this document under the
  filename WAVEPTCH.ZIP.  This file contains a program that, when run, sets up
  the WaveBlaster port properly so that the game can recognize and use it.

  Please note:  if you have to use the WAVEPTCH.ZIP fix, you will most likely
  need to run the fix program every time you want to play Duke Nukem 3D.  The
  program should be run just before you start the game.  Some users have
  have reported that their cards require the fix to be run even when they exit
  the game and immediately restart it.  At this point, 3D Realms has not been
  able to determine why this is required.

þ If you hear static when you are playing with a Sound Blaster or
  compatible card, make sure to turn the MIC and LINE volumes to zero.
  Your card may be seeing input from these, resulting in static.  For a
  Sound Blaster Pro, the program that adjusts these is called SBP-SET:  see
  your card's manual for precise instructions on how to do this.  If you
  still continue to hear static after doing this, try disconnecting any
  parallel port devices.  IRQ5 and IRQ7, which are used by sound cards, are
  often frequently used by printers as well.  If you have both plugged in,
  the result may be static and poor sound performance.

þ If you have an AWE32 and are having problems initializing the sound, check
  the SET BLASTER line.  Make sure that E620 is in there.  Check the section
  on "WHAT IS THE SET BLASTER COMMAND.." in this document for more information.

þ If you have an AWE32 Sound Card and get an "MPU-401 Initilization Error"
  message, you will need to turn your computer totally OFF, wait about 5-10
  seconds, and then turn it back on again.  Delete the DUKE3D.CFG file from
  your game's directory, then run the SETUP.EXE program again and try
  reselecting your music/sfx.  This error is caused by picking incorrect
  settings:  if you pick the wrong settings for an AWE32, you need to power
  down and retry, not just reboot.

þ If it seems like sounds that should be coming out of your left speaker are
  instead coming out of your right speaker (or vice-versa), you can fix this
  in the sound menus of the SETUP.EXE program.  Go to the Main Duke3D menu,
  choose the options menu, and then the sounds menu.  From there, you can
  toggle the "Flip Stereo" option on or off.  This should correct the problem.

þ If you are getting an error that says "Cannot play due to an invalid or
  coflicting IRQ", please see the following paragraph.

þ If you have a Sound Blaster (or a Sound Blaster clone) card and you are not
  getting sound effects, you most likely have your sound card configured
  incorrectly.  Most clone cards' setup programs do not properly set up a
  SET BLASTER line in your AUTOEXEC.BAT file, or do not set it up at all.  This
  is also the case with some new systems that have sound cards already
  installed.  The SET BLASTER command is used by the game's sound engine to
  determine where to send sound events for Sound Blaster and compatible cards.
  If this command is incorrect or missing, you will either not hear sounds or
  will experience sound distortion.  To correct this, please read the section
  of this file titled "What is the 'SET BLASTER' Command?" (Press F7 right now
  to see a list of sections).  Also, please consult your sound card's manual
  for information regarding Sound Blaster Emulation to find out what port
  address (or "base address"), IRQ, and DMA channel is being used by your card
  for Sound Blaster Emulation.  This information will be needed in order for
  you to follow the instructions in the "SET BLASTER" section of this document.

  This problem sometimes also affects people with true Sound Blaster cards,
  especially if you are running Windows 95 and are using the Win95 drivers.
  If you are running Windows 95 and don't have any sounds when playing in
  MS-DOS Mode, you probably do not have DOS-based Sound Blaster drivers loaded.
  Please check your sound card's manual for info on loading DOS-based drivers
  for your card.

  If your card does not have information concerning the SET BLASTER command
  (or loading DOS-based drivers) in its manual, or if your system or card did
  not come with a sound card manual, please contact the company that made your
  card or system (or the place you purchased the card or system from) before
  calling 3D Realms Technical Support.  Since sound cards differ so much from
  brand to brand (and sometimes even within the same brand and model), we
  cannot provide detailed assistance for every sound card on the market.  Your
  card or system manufacturer (or dealer) can usually provide much faster help
  for basic sound card problems than 3D Realms' Technical Support can.

  Here are a few more things you can try to get your sound card going:

  1) Check your sound card's manual on Sound Blaster emulation.  There may be
     some driver that you are not loading, or some switch you are not properly
     setting.  This is especially true for Plug And Play cards when you are
     running in DOS mode on a Win95 machine.

  2) Load up your duke3d.cfg file (or the one you're using) into an ASCII text
     editor, and look for the line "BlasterDMA16=5".  Change it to read
     "BlasterDMA16=1", it may make a difference.

  3) Check and make sure that you have the most up to date drivers for your
     sound card.

þ If you have a GUS and you are not getting sound effects, or if your GUS
  sound effects are scratchy or distorted, make sure your GF1 IRQ is set to
  7 or lower.  This is controlled by the SET ULTRASND= command in your
  AUTOEXEC.BAT file.  A sample of this command line would be:

                        SET ULTRASND=220,1,1,7,5

  The next to last digit on this line (the 7, in this example) is your GF1
  IRQ.  This number must be 7 or less for Duke3D to operate properly.  If it
  is higher than 7, you will need to edit your AUTOEXEC.BAT and change it
  to 7 or lower.  Save the change, exit your editor, and reboot so that the
  change will take effect.

  Please note that this is not a limitation of the sound engine used by Duke
  Nukem 3D.  Rather, it is a performance limitation imposed by the current
  generation of DOS extender technology, including the DOS/4GW extender used
  to create this game.  In almost every case, support for interrupts higher
  than 7 would result in an unacceptable slowdown of the game.

þ If you have a Packard Bell computer and are using thier combo modem/sound
  card but can't get any sound, try this.  In your c:\sound144\utility
  directory there should be a program called setmode.exe.  Change to this
  directory, and type "setmode /sbp".  This will tell the card to operate
  in Sound Blaster Pro mode.  If it is operating in Windows Sound System
  mode, you will NOT get any sounds, because the Windows Sound System is
  not supported.

þ If you are playing a network game, and get an error that reads something
  like "General Failure reading Drive ..." it probably means you're trying
  to play the game from a single shared copy on the work.  You can't do this,
  you need to have the game installed on each local computer that wishes to
  play the game.  Playing from a shared copy is not possible.

þ If you are playing a modem or network game and get a "Fatal Sync Error -
  Please Restart Game" message, this means that something has gone awry in your
  game.  If this happens, the only way to resolve it is to restart your game.
  Do not continue to play, as the game is unreliable at this point.

  If you are playing a modem or serial game when this is happening, check these
  things to make sure your parameters are set up correctly.

  1) Make sure your port speed is at 9600.  DO NOT CHANGE IT.  There is no
     advantage in opening the port speed any higher than 9600.

  2) Use the default modem init string of ATZ.

  If you are playing a network game when you get this error, try using a
  different socket value in the setup program.  Also, if there is a slow
  computer playing the game, it can cause this error.  Play with a faster
  computer.

þ If your modem initializes properly, but does not answer the line when an
  incoming call is received, try adding V1 to your init string.  Also, make
  sure that your port speed is set at 9600, and that you have the proper com
  port selected.

þ If your modem is not responding to the init string, first make sure you have
  the proper com port selected in the setup program.  This is especially true
  if you have a nonstandard com port like COM3 or COM4. If this is correct,
  you can try any of the following suggestions to get it to respond:

  ¯ Turn your modem off and on between attempts (especially if you have a USR
    Sportster).  If you have an internal modem, this would consist of turning
    your computer OFF (not just pressing your Reset button).
  ¯ Add a space or a tilde (~) in front of the init string.
  ¯ Add an extra AT in front of the init string.
  ¯ Add a ^M at the end of the init string.
  ¯ Make the init string ATZ instead of AT Z.

  We strongly urge you NOT TO CHANGE THE DEFAULT MODEM INIT STRINGS UNLESS YOU
  ARE SURE THE CHANGED SETTINGS WILL WORK.  Changing them tends to cause
  problems, and you should only change them if the defaults do not work.


þ If you see the error message "IPX & NetBIOS not detected", it means that you
  are trying to run a network game of Duke3D without loading your network
  drivers.  If this error occurs, consult the manual for your network on how
  to load these drivers.  3D Realms cannot help with the setup and use of your
  network.

þ If you get an error message that says, "You don't have enough free memory to
  run Duke Nukem 3D.  The DOS MEM command should report 6,500K (or 6.5 megs)
  total memory free.", it means that you do not have enough free total memory
  to run the game.  This is almost always caused by having sugh things as
  memory managers (QEMM/EMM386), disk caches (SMARTDRV, Norton Cache), and
  other programs loaded into memory.  These programs are usually loaded when
  your system is first powered up (otherwise known as when you "boot" your
  system).

  The best way around this is to "boot clean."  This means to boot your
  system without loading any unnecessary memory resident programs.  The
  easiest way to do this is to create a bootable floppy disk according to
  the instructions in your DOS manual (see the FORMAT /S command) and
  create a file called CONFIG.SYS and a file called AUTOEXEC.BAT on that
  disk.  Please refer to your DOS manual for instructions on creating these
  files.

  These files should contain the following lines:

   CONFIG.SYS
   ==========
   FILES=30
   BUFFERS=30
   STACKS=9,256
   <if your sound card requires a line in config.sys, put it here>
   <if you use disk compression, make sure to load that driver>
   <if you require a driver to access your hard drive, make sure to use it>

   AUTOEXEC.BAT
   ============
   @echo off
   <your path line>
   <your prompt line>
   <if your sound card requires a line in autoexec.bat, put it here>
   MOUSE <if you play with a mouse>
   SET BLASTER=<see section on SET BLASTER for more help on this line>

  The <your path line> and <your prompt line> items in the sample
  AUTOEXEC.BAT file refer to the lines that start with the words PATH and
  PROMPT in the AUTOEXEC.BAT file that is on your C: drive.  These lines
  are optional, but including them will make navigating your hard drive a
  little easier.

  If you are running Windows 95, you will need to to press the F8 key when you
  see the "Starting Windows 95" message, and then pick the option that says
  "Command Prompt Only".  This will prevent you from going into the GUI
  (desktop) portion of Windows 95.  Windows 95 is still capable of having
  multiple boot configurations, and we strongly urge you to create one.
  Please note that if you do this, you may not have access to your sound card
  or mouse when in DOS.  If so, you will need to load DOS-based drivers for
  your sound card or mouse.  Please check the respective manuals for your
  sound card and mouse for info on how to load drivers for them in DOS.

  If you have DOS 5, you will need to create a boot disk and make
  CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT files, using the above examples.  If you have
  DOS 6 or higher, you have two ways of booting clean without the need for
  a boot disk.

  For DOS 6 and higher, the fastest way is to reboot your computer and
  watch for a message that says "Starting MS-DOS" (IBM versions will say
  either "Starting PC DOS" or "Starting IBM DOS").  When you see this
  message, press your F8 function key.  You will then be prompted to
  confirm each line of your current CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT files.
  This will allow you to temporarily turn off the programs that you do not
  need or that may be causing problems.  ONLY ANSWER "YES" TO THE LINES
  SHOWN ABOVE AND THE "OK to process AUTOEXEC.BAT?"  QUESTION.  When
  finished, you will be left at a plain C:\> prompt.

  NOTE:  Pressing the Left Shift or F5 function key at the "Starting
         MS-DOS" prompt will not work properly.  Duke3D requires at least
         30 available "file handles" to operate properly.  This is defined
         by the FILES=30 statement in your CONFIG.SYS file.  If you bypass
         your CONFIG.SYS file completely by pressing Left Shift or F5, you
         are stuck with the DOS default of 8 file handles.  You will
         experience errors if you attempt to run the game this way.

  If you are more familiar with DOS, we strongly recommend that you set up
  a multi-boot option.  These newer versions of DOS allow you to set up
  mutliple boot configuration sections in your CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT
  files, mostly eliminating the need for boot disks.  Again, please consult
  your DOS manual for instructions on how to create a boot disk, or a
  multi-boot configuration using the parameters stated above.

  Duke 3D is a protected mode program, and as such does not require the
  services of such memory managers as QEMM, EMM386, etc.  Please read the
  section of this file on protected mode programs for more information.

þ If your copy of Duke3D locks up randomly and you have a sound card, you
  might be experiencing a DMA conflict.  These are caused by having more than
  one hardware device sharing a DMA (Direct Memory Access) channel with your
  sound card.  DMA channels are used by Duke3D to send sounds to your sound
  card.  When you have more than one piece of hardware on a single DMA channel,
  the chip on your motherboard that controls DMA transfers may become confused
  and send the sound to the wrong place.  When this happens, your system will
  lock up.

  Devices that usually cause DMA conflicts include CD-ROM drives, older
  dedicated FAX boards, tape backup drives connected to an accelerator card
  (not including tape drives plugged into your floppy drive controller cable),
  and in newer systems, the ECP/EPP parallel port on your I/O card or on the
  motherboard itself.  If any of these devices are present on your system, they
  may be the source of your lockups.

  DMA conflicts cannot usually be spotted by diagnostic software (CheckIt,
  PC Tools SI.EXE, Norton Utilities NDIAGS, etc.).  3D Realms does not
  recommend the use of such software to determine if you have a DMA conflict.
  Instead, if you suspect a DMA conflict, try the following test:

       1.  Run the SETUP program and select NONE for your Sound FX card.
       2.  Play Duke Nukem 3D and watch for lockups.

  If the game no longer locks up, then you were definitely experiencing a DMA
  conflict between your sound card and some other device.

  The ONLY way to resolve a DMA conflict is to physically move the conflicting
  device to another DMA channel.  In all but the rarest cases involving devices
  that "download" their configuration at boot-up time, you cannot do this
  through software.  You also cannot solve the problem by simply unloading the
  driver for the conflicting device.  Since this is a true hardware conflict,
  the problem can persist even if the device driver is not loaded when you boot
  your machine. In laymen's terms, booting clean won't solve the problem.  You
  will most likely have to move a "jumper" (see your manuals for a description)
  to physically reconfigure the conflicting device.  If you need assistance
  with reconfiguring your device(s), please consult your system's manuals or
  contact the manufacturer of the device(s) in question.  3D Realms cannot
  provide assistance for reconfiguring your hardware.

  For best performance, do not move your sound card to a different channel:
  leave it where it is (usually channel 1 for 8-bit cards, or channels 1 and 5
  for 16-bit cards).  Instead, move the conflicting device.  After you have
  resolved the DMA conflict, you may re-run the SETUP program and re-select
  your sound card under the Sound FX setup.

  If your copy of Duke3D still locks up, you may wish to check some settings
  in your CMOS configuration as a last resort.  If any of these are on, then
  switch them off:   Hidden Refresh, Hardware Video Shadowing, Turbo Switching.
  Also, if you have either of these, turn them on: HD1 Block Mode; IDE HDD
  Block Mode.  Use these ONLY as a "last resort" fix - make sure you read the
  rest of this file before you try these suggestions.

þ If you are using a joystick and your performance seems erratic, make sure to
  calibrate the joystick inside the setup program.  Also, check and make sure
  that the joystick port you are using is speed adjustable.  If it is, then try
  tinkering with the speed.  Check your port's manual for more info.

  Please note that most game ports that are built into sound cards, I/O cards,
  or motherboards are not speed adjustable.  Unless your port comes with
  software that allows you to calibrate your port's speed, you can assume that
  the port is not speed adjustable.

  If your system does not have a speed adjustable game port, your only solution
  may be to purchase one.  The reason for this is that most newer systems run
  at a speed that is several orders of magnitude faster than your port can
  send data.  In short, your system is outrunning your game port, and Duke3D
  can't see what the port is sending since it doesn't come in fast enough.
  Fortunately, speed adjustable ports such as the Gravis Eliminator or JDR
  Microdevices' MCT Micro-III are inexpensive solutions to this problem.
  (Note:  3D Realms does not endorse any of these products - they are listed
  here only as examples of what is available.)

  Finally, make sure you do not have more than one active joystick port on your
  machine at any time unless you have a special game port card that has two
  ports built onto it.  Two game ports cannot be active on two different cards,
  since they use the same hardware address.  You must disable one port if your
  system has two ports on two different cards.

þ If you notice the game running slowly on your system, here are a few
  suggestions on improving game performance.

  ¯ Disable your disk cache.  Since Duke3D does its own internal caching,
    external caches like SMARTDRV get in the way.  This can result in
    anything from slow performance to complete lockups.  Disk caches also take
    away memory that the game could use to operate more efficiently.

  ¯ Disable your upper memory manager (QEMM, Qualitas Max 8, EMM386, etc).
    Since Duke3D is a protected mode game, the services of these programs are
    not needed.

  ¯ Try reducing the screen size.  When playing the game, you can press either
    '-' to reduce your screen size, or '+' to increase it.

  ¯ Try reducing the amount of digital channels that you have set for sound
    effects.  Some system configurations have problems with having Duke3D set
    for higher than 4 digital channels.

  ¯ Try reducing the mixing selection on your sound card from 16 bit to 8
    bit.  This is done from the SETUP.EXE program, under the "SETUP
    SOUND FX" menu item.  8 Bit Mono is the fastest music/sound combination
    there is in Duke3D, so if you have slowdown problems, try selecting 8
    Bit Mono.


                         ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                         ³DUKE 3D COMMAND LINE PARAMETERS³
                         ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

þ There are a few command line parameters (also known as "switches") you
  can use to alter game performance.  Some of these will help speed up the
  game on slow computers, while others help to aid game play.

  A command line parameter is something that you type on the command line
  after the name of the program you're running.  The '/m' switch will be used
  as an example.  To use that one, you would need to start the game like this:

                                   DUKE3D /m

  The command line parameters for Duke3D are stackable, which means that you
  can use more than one at a time, if you need to.  An example of a stacked
  set of command line parameters would look like this...

                                  DUKE3D /m /t

  Please note that while these are intended for use with the Duke3D game, you
  can use them on the setup program.  The setup program will pass any command
  line parameters that were given to it to the game.

  Here is a list of the command line parameters you can use with Duke Nukem 3D.

  ?                     ¯ Gives you a list of all the command line parameters.

  /j                    ¯ Shows the version of the game you are running.
  /ns                   ¯ Turns off all sound effects.

  /nm                   ¯ Turns off music.

  /g<file>              ¯ Uses Group <file> (default is DUKE3D.GRP)

  /x<file>              ¯ Compiles alternate user.con file with name of <file>.

  /r                    ¯ Record a Demo.  To play them back, just run the game,
                          and they will be played back.  Do not end a level in
                          a demo, or it will not be recorded properly.  In
                          order for this to work, you also have to use the /v
                          and /l parameter (and optionally the /s parameter).

  /q#                   ¯ Turns on Fake Multi-Player.  This is used primarily
                          by our level desingers to test add-on levels and
                          various spawn related issues for multi-play only.
                          This command does not generate computer controlled
                          opponents for DukeMatch games.  This should not be
                          used if you intend on playing a true multi-player
                          game with other people.  # is number of fake players
                          to use (1-8).

  /v#                   ¯ Go directly to Level # (1,2,3 or just 1 in shareware)

  /l##                  ¯ Go directly to Level ## (Varies by Episode Number)

  /s#                   ¯ Use Skill Level # (where # is a number from 0 to 3)

  /m                    ¯ Turns off Game Monsters during play.  This would have
                          no real purpose for single play, and is intended for
                          DukeMatch games only.

  /t#                   ¯ Respawning Things.  This is intended for DukeMatch
                          games, and is not meant for single play.  # can be
                          either 0, 1, 2, or x.  0 means Monsters only, 1 means
                          Items only, 2 means Inventory items, and x means all.

  /c#                   ¯ Defines which type of Multi-Play will be used.  # can
                          be either 0, 1, or 2.  0 means standard Dukematch.
                          1 means Co-Op play, and 2 means "old" Dukematch.

  /f#                   ¯ Send Fewer Packets during Multi-Player Mode.  This
                          should never be needed during a modem, serial, or
                          network game, and is intended only for places like
                          TEN who use a slightly different arrangement which
                          requires less traffic.  This would also be useful
                          for programs such as Kali, JServe, etc....  # can
                          either be 1, 2, or 4.

  /i#                   ¯ Defines which type of network mode is used.  # can be
                          either a 0 or a 1.  1 is meant 2-4 players, and 0 is
                          meant for 5-8 players.  The difference is that
                          packets with mode 0 are handled differently than
                          in mode 1.  This paramter should not be used by the
                          player, this is passed automatically by the setup
                          program.

  -8250                 ¯ Used by the setup program to tell the game that a
                          slow serial card is in use.  This should never be
                          used on its own.

  -net                  ¯ Used by the setup program when a network game being
                          played.  This should never be used on its own.


                      ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                      ³HOW TO SET UP AND PLAY NETWORK GAMES³
                      ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

NOTE: In order to play a Network game, you must have IPX/SPX or NetBIOS network
      protocols loaded.  Please see your network manual, or contact your
      network administrator for info on how to load these.  3D Realms cannot
      help you with setting up your network.

Here is a short summary of how to play a network game.  A more detailed
explanation will follow.

1) Run the setup program.  Once in the setup program, select "Network Game".
2) Alter any of the options you wish, and then select "Launch Duke Nukem 3D".
3) Once all the players are found, the game will load.  Once the game is at
   the Main Menu, select "New Game".
4) If you are Player 1, you will choose the game options.  All other players
   will have to wait for Player 1 to select the game options.
5) If you are player 1, select the difficulty, level, etc, and select "Begin
   Play".  You're in!

Here's a more detailed description of the Network Game Options:

1) Run the Setup program, and select "Network Game".  From here, you can alter
   several game parameters before actually launching Duke3D.  The parameters
   you can change are:

   Number of Players  -> This option will let you alter the total number of
                         players to be found in your game.
   Network Socket #   -> This will allow more than one simulteanous network
                         game to occur at once.  If you change this, all people
                         playing in your game must be using the same value, or
                         you won't find each other.
   Setup Macros       -> From here you can set up the text taunts you can use
                         during DukeMatches.  During play, you activate them by
                         hitting Control-F1 through Control-F10.
   Change RTS File    -> This will let you alter the RemoteRidicule (tm) sound
                         file.  By default, this is DUKE.RTS.  The RTS file is
                         the file that contains recorded voice taunts you can
                         throw at your opponents during DukeMatch.  These are
                         activated by pressing Alt-F1 through Alt-F10.  NOTE:
                         If you are using a custom RTS file, ALL players must
                         have the same RTS file in order to hear your taunts.
   Change Player Name -> When you are playing multi-player Duke, you are known
                         to other players by the name you choose here.
   Launch Duke Nukem  -> Once you've selected all your options, choose this
                         to run the game!  DO NOT use the launch option from
                         the Main Menu.  If you intend on playing a Network
                         game, you must use this option.

2) Once you've hit "Launch Duke Nukem 3D", the game will be run.  Once at the
   Main Menu, hit "New Game".  If you are Player 1, then you will have a few
   more things to do.  If you are any other player, you are done.  Just sit
   wait for Player 1 to set all the options.

3) If you are Player 1, you have several items you need to select before the
   game will actually start.  They are:

   a) Game Type    -> This is either DukeMatch or Co-Op.  Cooperative is a way
                      of playing "against the game".  In other words, you and
                      your friend(s) both play with each other.  DukeMatch
                      means you and your buddies just blast each other!
   b) Episode #    -> If you have the registered version, you can choose a
                      specific Episode number.  For shareware, you cannot use
                      this option.
   c) Level #      -> You can choose which Level in the Episode to play here.
   d) Monsters     -> This determines whether you want to have monsters in the
                      game with you or not.  You can choose none, or any of the
                      game difficulty levels here.  This will choose how strong
                      the monsters are if they are there.
   e) Record       -> If you have the registered version, you can record your
                      game for all to see!  This will do nothing if you only
                      have the shareware episode.
   f) User Maps    -> If you have custom home-made levels and you place them
                      in your Duke Nukem 3D directory, this is where you can
                      choose them.  WARNING: If you choose a custom level, all
                      players must have the level.  If they do not, or have a
                      different version, the game will crash or lose sync.
                      This option will do nothing if you only have the
                      shareware version.
   g) Begin Play   -> Once you've selected all the options, select this to
                      begin your game!  That's it!

4) Select Option "G" and start your new game.  If you are player 1, you can
   restart a new level at any time by picking "New Game" again.  Everyone
   will be taken to the new game.

þ NETWORK PLAY NOTES AND REMARKS

  ¯ You cannot join a game in progress.  All players must be present at the
    start of the game.  If you quit, you cannot rejoin without everyone else
    quitting and restarting.

  ¯ If you are playing a network game and any player quits the game, the rest
    will continue to play.

  ¯ If Player 1 quits the game and the rest of the people continue to play,
    the functionality (assignment of game parameters) will be reassigned.
    Someone else will then be Player 1.

  ¯ If you are playing in Co-Operative mode, pressing the letter "K" during
    play will let you see through the eyes of your teammates.

  ¯ When playing a Dukematch game, if you go to the next level in your game,
    your weapons do not carry over to the next level.


                      ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                      ³HOW TO SET UP AND PLAY A MODEM GAME³
                      ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

NOTE: In order to play a Modem game of Duke Nukem 3D, you need a 100% Hayes
      Compatible modem of at least 9600bps or faster.  We also strongly
      recommend a serial port with a 16550 UART chip.  Older 16450's or 8250's
      are not fast enough and can cause synchronization errors and slowdowns.
      If you have one of these older ports, please upgrade to a serial card.
      with a 16550 UART.  If you have a software supported or an emulated
      port, it will not be detected as a 16550.  You need a TRUE 16550 for it
      to be detected as such.

  We strongly urge you NOT TO CHANGE THE DEFAULT MODEM INIT STRINGS UNLESS YOU
  ARE SURE THE CHANGED SETTINGS WILL WORK.  Changing them tends to cause
  problems, and you should only change them if the defaults do not work.

Here is a short summary of how to play a modem game.  A more detailed
explanation will follow.

1) Run the setup program.  Once in the setup program, select "Modem Game".
2) Make sure your COM Port is set up correctly (Select Setup COM Port).  We
   strongly recommend picking a port speed of only 9600 until you are sure you
   can connect properly.
3) If you are calling, select "Phone Number List" and pick a phone number to
   call, then select "Dial Your Opponent".  After this, pick "Launch Duke Nukem
   3D".  If you are the one being called, select "Wait For Call", and then
   select "Launch Duke Nukem 3D".
3) Once all the players are found, the game will load.  Once the game is at
   the Main Menu, select "New Game".
4) If you are Player 1, you will choose the game options.  All other players
   will have to wait for Player 1 to select the game options.
5) If you are player 1, select the difficulty, level, etc, and select "Begin
   Play".  You're in!

Here's a more detailed description of the Modem Game Options:

1) Run the Setup program and select "Modem game".  From here, you can alter
   several game parameters before actually launching Duke3D.  The parameters
   you can change are as follows.

   --  You can only choose one of the first three options at any one time. --
        -- The rest of these options are modem configuration options. --

   Already Connected  -> Choose this if you have already connected with a
                         terminal software package such as Qmodem or Telix.

   Wait For Call      -> Choose this if you are playing a modem game and wish
                         to have your friend call you.

   Dial your Opponent -> Choose this if you are playing a modem game and wish
                         to be the one who dials the phone.

   Setup Com Port     -> This option lets you configure the COM port you wish
                         to use for playing Modem Duke. This is where you would
                         need to select COM 1 or 2, the IRQ, UART, and/or Port
                         Speed.  We recommend against changing the IRQ or UART
                         values unless instructed to by 3D Realms Tech Support,
                         or unless you are 100% certain of what you are doing.

   Setup Modem        -> Duke Nukem 3D used an advanced modem driver, and as
                         such, you don't need to mess with fiddly init strings.
                         The default of just "ATZ" will work with 99% of the
                         modems out there.  If, for some reason, you find you
                         need to alter your modem init string from ATZ, this is
                         where you would do it.  Also, if you need to change
                         from TONE to PULSE dialing, or add a 9 to get an
                         outside line, or some other similar modem condition,
                         this is where you would do it.

   Setup Macros       -> This option lets you set up the text based taunts you
                         can use during a DukeMatch game.

   Change RTS File    -> This will let you pick a different RemoteRidicule(tm)
                         sound file, if you have made or received one.  The
                         default filename here is DUKE.RTS.  The RTS file is
                         the file that contains recorded voice taunts you can
                         throw at your opponents during DukeMatch.  These are
                         activated by pressing Alt-F1 through Alt-F10.  NOTE:
                         If you are using a custom RTS file, ALL players must
                         have the same RTS file in order to hear your taunts.

   Change Player Name -> When you are playing multi-player Duke, you are known
                         to other players by the name you choose here.

   Phone Number List  -> This option lets you set up a dialing directory of all
                         your friends who play Modem Duke, so you don't have to
                         enter their phone numbers every time you want to play.

   Launch Duke 3D     -> Once you've selected all the options for your modem
                         game, select this to start!

2) Once you've hit "Launch Duke Nukem 3D", the game will run.  Once at the
   Main Menu, hit "New Game".  If you are Player 1, you will have a few more
   things to do.  If you are any other player, you are done.  Just sit back and
   wait for Player 1 to set all the options.

3) If you are Player 1, you have several items you need to select before the
   game will actually start.  They are:

   a) Game Type    -> This is either DukeMatch or Co-Op.  Cooperative is a way
                      of playing "against the game".  In other words, you and
                      your friend(s) both play with each other.  DukeMatch
                      means you and your buddies just blast each other!
   b) Episode #    -> If you have the registered version, you can choose a
                      specific episode number.  For shareware, you cannot use
                      this option.
   c) Level #      -> You can choose which Level in the Episode to play here.
   d) Monsters     -> This determines whether you want to have monsters in the
                      game with you or not.  You can either choose none or any
                      of the game difficulty levels here.  This will choose how
                      strong the monsters are if present.
   e) Record       -> If you have the registered version, you can record your
                      game for all to see!  This will do nothing if you only
                      have the shareware episode.
   f) User Maps    -> If you have custom-made levels and you place them in your
                      Duke Nukem 3D directory, this is where you can choose
                      them.  WARNING: If you choose a custom level, all other
                      players must have this level.  If they do not, or have a
                      different version, the game will crash or lose sync.
                      This option will do nothing if you only have the
                      shareware version.
   g) Begin Play   -> Once you've selected all the options, select this to
                      begin your game.  That's it!

4) Select Option "G" and start your new game.  If you are player 1, you can
   restart a new level at any time by picking "New Game" again.  Your opponent
   will be taken to the new game.


                     ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                     ³HOW TO SET UP AND PLAY A SERIAL GAME³
                     ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

NOTE: In order to play a serial game of Duke Nukem 3D, you will need a null
      modem cable (not a serial cable with a null modem adapter).  We also
      strongly recommend a serial card with a 16550 UART chip.  The older 16450
      and 8250 chips can cause slowdowns and problems during setup and
      gameplay.

Playing a serial game of Duke Nukem 3D is quite easy.  All you need to do is
make sure that you have your two computers connected via a null modem cable.
After you have hooked the computers together, run the setup program and select
"Serial Game".  From there, if you need to, you can configre your COM port
(make sure it is using the correct port for your computer).  You can also alter
such Dukematch items as Text taunt macros, the RTS (RemoteRidicule) file to be
used, and your Player Name.  Once you've done this, select "Launch Duke Nukem
3D".

If you do not connect, check and make sure that the cable you are using is a
true null modem cable.  Standard "straight-through" serial cables and (in most
cases) serial cables with a null modem adapter will not work.  Also, check and
make sure that both sides are opening the serial port at the same speed.  We
strongly urge you to leave it at the default of 9600 until you are sure you can
properly play the game.

Player 1 and Player 2 are assigned at run time.  If you've been selected as
Player 1, you have several items you need to select before the game will
actually start.  They are:

   a) Game Type    -> This is either DukeMatch or Co-Op.  Cooperative is a way
                      of playing "against the game".  In other words, you and
                      your friend(s) both play with each other.  DukeMatch
                      means you and your buddies just blast each other!
   b) Episode #    -> If you have the registered version, you can choose a
                      specific Episode number.  For shareware, you cannot use
                      this option.
   c) Level #      -> You can choose which level in the episode to play here.
   d) Monsters     -> This determines whether you want to have monsters in the
                      game with you or not.  You can either choose none or any
                      of the game difficulty levels here.  This will choose how
                      strong the monsters are if present.
   e) Record       -> If you have the registered version, you can record your
                      game for all to see!  This will do nothing if you only
                      have the shareware episode.
   f) User Maps    -> If you have custom-made levels that you created or
                      received and you place them in your Duke Nukem 3D
                      directory, this is where you can choose them.  WARNING:
                      If you choose a custom level, both players must have the
                      level.  If they do not, or if they have different
                      versions, the game will crash or lose sync.
                      This option will do nothing if you only have the
                      shareware version.
   g) Begin Play   -> Once you've selected all the options, select this to
                      begin your game.  That's it!
            ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
            ³WHAT IS THE "SET BLASTER" COMMAND, AND WHY DO I NEED IT?³
            ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

If you are using a Sound Blaster clone, then this section is of particular
interest to you.  A good deal of Sound Blaster clones do not properly set up
the SET BLASTER command.  If you have a clone card and do not get any
sound (or poor/bad sound), this is probably why.

Duke Nukem 3D (or any other Apogee/3D Realms game that uses the Sound Blaster)
uses the SET BLASTER command to figure out where to send its sound output. A
Sound Blaster card can have many different sound outputs, and since there are
zillions of computers out there, a way needs to be used in order to tell the
game where your sound card is located.  The SET BLASTER line is how we do it.
Check to make sure that you have the SET BLASTER line in your AUTOEXEC.BAT
file.  This code is an example, and isn't exactly what you need to put in your
system, make sure to read the entire explanation of this command.

NOTE: Some of these parameters (P, H, & E) are dependant on certain types of
      cards.  For example, the E is only needed if you have an AWE32.  The
      minimum requirements are to have the A, I, D, & T parameters.  The other
      three may or may not be needed depending on what type of card you have.
      Please read this entire section to see if you need any of them.  If you
      are using a clone card, or some card that's not a "true" Sound Blaster,
      then you will most likely only need A, I, D, & T.

SET BLASTER=A220 I5 D1 T6 P330 H6 E620
|   |       |    |  |  |  |    |  |
|   |       |    |  |  |  |    |  |_______ AWE32 Only Parameter
|   |       |    |  |  |  |    |__________ "High" DMA Channel
|   |       |    |  |  |  |_______________ MIDI Port
|   |       |    |  |  |__________________ Type of Card
|   |       |    |  |_____________________ DMA Channel
|   |       |    |________________________ Interrupt
|   |       |_____________________________ Port Address
|   |_____________________________________ Environment Variable
|_________________________________________ DOS Command

NOTE: There can be no spaces between the word BLASTER and the equal sign (=).
If you have a space in there, your system will set the parameter incorrectly.
Our games will not be able to recognize the command and will not work properly.

These settings will most likely not be the ones you need for your board.  This
is the case since the Port Address, Interrupt and DMA Channel can be set by
adjusting "jumpers" on your sound card.  Some newer cards have this information
controlled by software, so please consult your card's manual for more
information on how to set these things.  You should also check your manual if
you are unclear as to how to tell what settings your card is using.  This
information *IS* important, so we recommended that you know precisely what the
settings are.  If you are using a card that "emulates" the Sound Blaster, you
should check your card's manual on how to set up the card for Sound Blaster
emulation (if your card is not natively supported by this game).

The settings shown in the above example are based on the defaults used for a
Sound Blaster AWE32.  Here is an explanation of each setting, along with the
most commonly used settings:

The PORT ADDRESS is almost always 220.  This seems to be the default for
most Sound Blasters and compatibles, regardless of brand.  Unless you know
you've switched this away from 220, it's a safe bet it's still there.

The INTERRUPT is something that varies from system to system.  IRQ 5 is most
common on newer true Sound Blaster cards, while older Sound Blasters and some
clones (regardless of age) default to IRQ 7.  While many IRQs are available,
3D Realms does not recommend using IRQ 2 or IRQ 10.  Most of the people we
run into who use IRQ 2 have difficulty getting their programs to run properly,
unless they switch to a different IRQ channel.  Also, while IRQ 10 may work,
we cannot guarantee that it will.  Finally, if you are using a Gravis
Ultrasound or Ultrasound Max, you must use an IRQ of 7 or less.  The sound
engine used in this game does not support the GUS default of 11.

The DMA CHANNEL is one that causes some people problems.  By default, this is
almost always set at 1.  Unless you have a specific need to change this, it's
probably still at 1.  If you're running into lockups using digitized sounds
with our games, this is probably where your problem lies. If you get lockups
with a 3D Realms game that has digitized sounds and you have this variable set
properly, try turning off the digitized sounds.  If the game now plays without
locking up, you probably have a DMA conflict.  Please see the "Duke Nukem 3D
Detailed Help & TroubleShooting" section of this file for instructions on
fixing this problem.

The TYPE OF CARD is something that is fairly easy to check out.  If you're
running a non-Creative Labs sound card, then you want this to either be 1 or 3,
depending on which card it is.  In the majority of cases, it will be a 1 if
you are not using a "true" Sound Blaster.  If you do have a "true" Sound
Blaster, then the variable is one of these...

      1 for an original (old) Sound Blaster.
      2 for an original (old) Sound Blaster Pro.
      3 for a newer Sound Blaster 2.0 (Sound Blaster deluxe edition).
      4 for a newer Sound Blaster Pro (SB Pro 2.0)
      5 for a MicroChannel Sound Blaster (IBM PS/2 MCA-bus systems only).
      6 for a Sound Blaster 16, Vibra 16, or an AWE32.

As shown here, the age of the card can make a difference.  If you have an older
card like the Sound Blaster 1.5, choose the appropriate number.  Clone cards or
cards that emulate the Sound Blaster usually have a T variable of 1.
Experiment to see what works best for you.

The MIDI PORT parameter will only be needed if you are using a card that has
MIDI capabilities.  Your sound card manual will tell you if you need this.  It
is generally used only on true Sound Blaster cards, specifically the SB16 and
higher.  If your card requires it, this is where you define what MIDI port you
are using.  330 seems to be the default for most cards, so if you have such a
card, and you haven't changed anything from factory defaults, this is probably
where it still is.

The HIGH DMA CHANNEL is something that is used primarily on Sound Blaster 16,
Vibra 16 (built into some motherboards), and AWE32 cards.  This is not the same
as the standard (or "low") DMA channel:  this is a different one.  This is only
used if you're using a 16 bit sound card capable of playing 16 bit Sound Blaster
sounds.  By default, this is usually 5, so unless you know that it's something
else, it's probably still 5.

Please note that this parameter can cause lockups on some systems.  Creative
Labs' installation programs warn that some motherboards cannot handle 16-bit
DMA transfers, which is used if you select the default high DMA channel of 5.
If you experience game lockups, try reconfiguring your card and this setting to
use DMA channel 1 (i.e., the same channel that is used for the D parameter).
See your card's documentation for details on this problem.

The E620 parameter is something that is needed _only_ if you have a Creative
Labs AWE32 sound card.  If you have one of these, this parameter will have been
set up properly assuming you've installed the software that came with the card.
Check your AWE32 documentation for a more thorough explanation of what this
paramter is used for.

We get a lot of questions from people wanting to know why they have to use this
if they don't have a true Sound Blaster.  It's simple, really - the command has
NOTHING to do with what brand of sound card you have.  3D Realms games that use
digitized sounds expect Sound Blasters and compatibles to be at specific
settings.  If they are not, then the game needs to be told this.  The way to do
this is with the BLASTER environment variable.  That's why this is needed.
Some of our newer programs (Duke3D, ROTT) have specific setup programs which let
you set up this information manually, but they still require the SET BLASTER
line to operate at 100% efficiency.

Please remember to add this to AUTOEXEC.BAT, save the file back to disk,
reboot your computer, and make sure to delete the game's config file
(DUKE3D.CFG) before running the game again.  If you have any further questions,
please drop 3D Realms a line.



                       ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                       ³WINDOWS 95 AND OS/2 ISSUES³
                       ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

Duke Nukem 3D is only officially supported under the following operating
systems:

                 Microsoft MS-DOS (versions 5.0 through 6.22)
                     IBM PC DOS (versions 5.0 through 7.0)
                                 Novell DOS 7

This game was designed to be run only under these environments.  It was not
designed for use under any other operating system, including Windows 95, OS/2
Warp, or on a Macintosh using a DOS compatibility card.  For this reason, 3D
Realms cannot provide technical support for problems running the game under
these environments.  If you experience problems, contact the company that made
your operating system.

PLEASE NOTE:  While Microsoft Windows 95 has the ability to boot in "MS-DOS
Mode", this is still not a supported environment.  Microsoft has made many
changes to the version of MS-DOS (v7.0) that is integrated into Windows 95.
These changes have been known to cause Duke Nukem 3D to fail to operate on some
systems, while they have caused no problems on other systems.  If you choose to
try to run Duke Nukem 3D in MS-DOS mode on your system, be advised that you do
so at your own risk.  Neither 3D Realms Entertainment nor Apogee Software can
be held responsible for any problems that you may encounter, nor can we provide
technical support for such problems.


                            ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                            ³WHAT IS PROTECTED MODE?³
                            ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

As promised earlier in this document, here is an explanation of protected mode.
This information is not necessary to get the game running, but it's included as
background information for the curious.

Historically, DOS programs have always required that you run them in the first
640k of ram.  This was a limitation imposed on DOS back when v1.0 was the only
thing around.  For compatibility's sake, this is the way things have remained.
Any memory above 640k could only be used for data storage, not for program
execution.  That's why you always saw those dreaded "Out of Memory" messages.

As time went on, certain programs, (and later DOS itself) gained the ability to
load part of themselves "high", leaving more conventional (the first 640k) of
memory available.  You still had the limitation of the 640k barrier, but some
more breathing room was made by these memory advances.

More recently, advances were made in memory management so that programs could
run in protected mode.  Protected mode is a special way of programming so that
your program doesn't have the 640k barrier.  Depending on how the program is
written, the entire thing is in protected mode, or it requires the use of a DOS
"Extender" to run that way.  Duke3D is such a program.  Duke3D uses a DOS
extender to access much more memory than it would have been able to if it were
written the old way.  A game of this complexity would have never been able to
have been written if the old 640k barrier method of programming was used.

Well, you might be asking, what about my older programs?  Can't I just use a
DOS extender, and have that run something like "Wolfenstein 3D", and never get
those out of memory errors?  Well, it's not as simple as that.  If a program is
using a DOS extender, it has to be written a special way.  A DOS extender isn't
just a magic wand that you can use to wipe away your memory problems for
non-protected mode programs.  The program has to be written a special way to
make use of the DOS extender.

To summarize, protected mode (sometimes referred to as the "flat memory" model)
is a way for a DOS program (either by itself, or through the use of a DOS
extender) to access more than just the first 640k of memory for program
execution.  Because of this, more complex programs (such as Duke3D) are able to
be written.  If using the old 640k barrier method (sometimes referred to as a
"segmented memory" model), this type of program would not have been possible.

If you're still confused, don't worry about it.  As I said above, this
information is not necessary for the proper play of Duke3D.  It's in here for
background information only.  If you're still inclined, check out some DOS
programming books available at your library or a book store.  They have far
more detailed explanations of this than would be possible in this document.


                          ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                          ³CONTACTING TECHNICAL SUPPORT³
                          ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

3D Realms thanks you very much for playing our games.  Customer satisfaction
is a high priority of ours, and we strive to please everyone.  Our Technical
Support staff is available to assist all of our customers in solving any
technical problems that may be experienced.  Our Technical Support Department
is available to answer your questions Monday through Friday during the hours of
8:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M. Central Standard Time.  The phone number for the Tech
Support Department is (214) 278-5655.

However, the voice line isn't your only channel of contact.  We are also
reachable via a fax machine at (214) 278-4670, (24 hours a day).  Please
allow two full working days for faxed replies, and PLEASE include a return
fax number on your fax!  If you do not have a return fax number, please
include a mailing address so that we can respond via mail.

You can also write to us at this mailing address:

                          3D Realms Entertainment
                          POB 496419
                          Garland, TX 75049-6389
                          United States of America

If you do contact our Technical Support department, please be at your computer,
and have it ready for assistance.  If you can't be at your computer, please
have the following things available when you call:

     ¯ Printouts of your CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT files.

     ¯ A print of the results of a "MEM /C" command (see your DOS manual
       for details).  If you get an error doing MEM /C, do a plain MEM
       instead.

     ¯ A list of all devices installed in your system, such as sound
       cards, CD-ROM drives, modems, etc.  Brand names, model numbers,
       and settings for each device will help greatly.

     ¯ A detailed description of the problem, what you have already tried to
       do to resolve it (in detail), and PRECISE error messages.

It may be possible to provide technical support without these things, but it
will be much more difficult.


                                ÚÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄ¿
                                ³3D REALMS ONLINE³
                                ÀÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÄÙ

3D Rrealms Technical Support can also be contacted via a variety of electronic
media.  Several major online services are monitored, and our online contact
points are listed below.   Also, a variety of Bulletin Board networks are
monitored as well, and those are also listed.

þ Major Online Services

3D Realms has forums on both CompuServe and America Online!   Both of these
forums have all of our shareware (as well as Apogee's, too!) available for
download.  They also have other helpful files, as well as some user submitted
files as well.  If you are on these services, and haven't checked out our
forum, why not try 'em today?

     ¯ CompuServe: Type "GO REALMS" at any ! prompt
     ¯ America Online: Use the keyword '3D REALMS' to get to our forum.

þ Internet Services

3D Realms has its own World Wide Web Site!  Point your Web Browser to the URL
http://www.3drealms.com, and you'll reach us on the Web!  We have all kinds of
cool files and information here, so if you like Apogee or 3D Realms and you're
on the Web, you need to be here!  You can learn about future games, take a
"virtual tour" of our headquarters, and participate in the lively message
bases!

For the latest Duke Nukem 3D Info Updates, please visit the Official Duke Nukem
3D home page.  It's reachable at http://www.3drealms.com/duke3d.html.  You can
pick up lots of Duke info here, as well as finding links to customer created
Duke Nukem 3D WWW sites!

Join our Internet mailing list!  The 3D Realms mailing list is a list where you
can receive press releases, general info, new game release notifications, and
other miscellaneous items. Drop us a line at 3drealms@3drealms.com, and we'll
put you on.  It doesn't cost anything, and all we need is your Internet E-Mail
address!  Your friends are probably on the list - are you?

3D Realms has an official Anonymous FTP site for our shareware downloads:

                        ftp://3drealms.best.com

This is a standard Anonymous FTP site.  If you're getting an error like
"Anonymous Access Denied", "Cannot Access File", or something like that, you're
probably just running into the limit.  All Anonymous FTP sites have limits to
the number of people that can access it at once.  Think of it as a busy signal,
and try again later.  We also recommend talking to your local Internet Service
provider (or the author of your FTP software) about how to properly use the
Internet program you're trying to use.

Also, as long as you're already on the Internet, check out the revolutionary
Software Creations Web BBS.  It's a whole new concept for the Internet!  Point
your web browser to http://www.swcbbs.com!

þ Software Creations & other Bulletin Board Networks

We can be reached on Software Creations, the Apogee/3D Realms BBS.  Software
Creations can be reached by calling 1-508-368-7036.  Software Creations is our
#1 file site.  Our games are released there before anywhere else in the world,
so if you want the latest stuff, take a trip over to Software Creations, the
BBS voted #1 two years running by the readers of BoardWatch Magazine!

Again, make sure to check out the Software Creations Web BBS.  If you're on the
World Wide Web, point your browser at http://www.swcbbs.com.  You'll be glad
you did!

There are several BBS networks that are monitored for Apogee/3D Realms
messages.  Our Online Support Representative monitors all of the following BBS
networks:

                                    Fidonet
                                Relaynet (RIME)
                                    Intelec
                                     Ilink

All of these BBS networks have Games, Shareware, and Apogee conferences.  Any
3D Realms-related topics are also welcome in the Apogee conferences.  Private
mail can also be sent to Apogee on Fidonet and Rime with the following
addresses:

    Fidonet       -> 1:124/9006              Rime       -> APOGEE (or 1674)

Apogee also has a FDN on the Fidonet Filebone, where both Apogee and 3D Realms
files are distributed.  Check with your local Fido Filebone administration for
more info on how to get Apogee's and 3D Realms' shareware delivered right to
your BBS!  Check FILEBONE.NA (available from your local Fido administration)
for more info.

                All trademarks mentioned in this manual are the
                      property of their respective owners.

     This document was written by Joe Siegler, with help from Lee Jackson.
    Thanks to Mark Dochtermann for the section on advanced controller setup.
